JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
campaigns respond
to the first head-to-head battle
between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump, while
we put some
of the biggest moments into
context.
Also ahead this Tuesday,
bringing the music
back: how Boston Public Schools
are expanding
arts education for their
students.
MYRAN PARKER-BRASS, Arts
Activist: Our job
is to make sure our students see
art, understand
art, appreciate it, and if they
are passionate
enough, create it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: explaining
the disconnect
of white working-class Americans
from the
rest of the country, and how
it's playing
into this election.
J.D. VANCE, Author, "Hillbilly
Elegy: A Memoir
of a Family and Culture in
Crisis": They feel
like their communities have
really been struggling
in a lot of different ways for
20 and 30 years,
and nobody has really cared.
And Trump is the first person to
at least
see these communities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the debate
day after,
and the two presidential
candidates have decidedly
different takes on how things
went.
John Yang begins our coverage
with this report.
JOHN YANG: Twelve hours after
stepping off
the debate stage, Hillary
Clinton was back
on her campaign plane sounding
upbeat.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, we had a great, great time
last night.
The real point is about
temperament and fitness
and qualifications to hold the
most important,
hardest job in the world.
And I think people saw last
night some very
clear differences between us.
JOHN YANG: Clinton said some of
Donald Trump's
debate statements were
demonstrably untrue
and dismissed one of his
grievances about
their face-off.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Anybody
who complains
about the microphone is not
having a good
night.
JOHN YANG: Trump told reporters
after the
debate that his mic was
defective and suggested
it was on purpose.
He also claimed that moderator
Lester Holt
of NBC News was tougher on him
than on Clinton.
Trump insists he came out ahead
anyway.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I was asked about my tax
returns, which I
have told about 500 times.
I think I did really well in
answering those
questions, but those questions
are not answerable
in a positive light.
JOHN YANG: Last night, Clinton
opened up a
new front in the battle for
women's votes.
At the end of the debate, she
spoke of the
case of a former Miss Universe.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He loves
beauty contests,
supporting them and hanging
around them.
And he called this woman "Miss
Piggy."
Then he called her "Miss
Housekeeping," because
she was Latina.
Donald, she has a name.
DONALD TRUMP: Where did you find
this?
Where did you find this?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Her name
is Alicia
Machado.
DONALD TRUMP: Where did you find
this?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And she
has become
a U.S. citizen, and you can
bet...
DONALD TRUMP: Oh, really?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: ...
she's going to
vote this November.
DONALD TRUMP: OK, good.
MAN: You are the new Miss
Universe!
JOHN YANG: The Clinton campaign
quickly released
a Web video of Machado, a
Clinton supporter,
criticizing Trump.
ALICIA MACHADO, Former Miss
Universe: "Hello,
Miss Piggy.
Hello, Miss Housekeeping."
JOHN YANG: This morning, the
Republican nominee
fired back on FOX News.
DONALD TRUMP: She gained a
massive amount
of weight.
And it was a real problem, not
only that,
her attitude.
And we had a real problem with
her.
MAN: Good afternoon, Miami.
JOHN YANG: This afternoon at a
town hall meeting
with Latinos in Miami, Trump
mentioned the
debate only briefly.
DONALD TRUMP: It was an
interesting evening,
certainly, and big league,
definitely big
league.
JOHN YANG: In North Carolina, an
energized
Clinton relived a memorable
moment from the
debate.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: At one
point, he was
kind of digging me for spending
time off the
campaign trail to get prepared.
And I said, yes, you know what,
I did prepare.
And I will tell you something
else I prepared
for.
I prepared to be president of
the United States,
and I think that's good.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Early ratings show
that more than
81 million people tuned in last
night, a record
for a presidential debate.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
closer look
at some of last night's debating
points and
hear from a representative of
each campaign
after the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. Senate failed
to advance a spending bill to
keep the federal
government running past Friday,
when the fiscal
year ends.
Democrats demanded money to help
Flint, Michigan,
with its lead-contaminated
water, and a dozen
conservative Republicans
defected.
Charges of election-year
politics dominated
the debate.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: After
Labor Day, it was pretty clear
what the way
forward was, but they have sort
of dragged
everybody around here for
multiple weeks,
obviously interested in
producing some kind
of shutdown scenario.
SEN.
HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: All we
want to do is help the people of
Flint.
This shouldn't be hard.
We should be able to find a path
forward to
fund the government and help the
people of
Flint.
There's no excuse for leaving
the people of
Flint, Michigan, behind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: GOP leaders have
promised to
address the Flint water issue
after the election
in a separate piece of
legislation.
In Syria, the government
offensive to retake
all of the besieged city of
Aleppo shifted
into a deadly new gear.
Ground troops and armor began
moving in, as
we hear from Alex Thomson of
Independent Television
News.
ALEX THOMSON: Backed by the
relentless airstrikes,
several sources are confirming
tonight that
Syrian government ground forces
have attacked
into rebel-held east Aleppo from
the north
and the south today.
The white helmet civil defense
rescue teams
on the streets of the east of
the city, the
rebel-held area, to rescue those
caught in
the airstrikes and shell fire,
as they do
night and day, and civilians,
250,000 of them,
caught up in the wider effects
of warfare
and siege in east Aleppo.
WOMAN (through translator): I
don't know what
to say.
Our hearts are full of fear.
May God hold the tyrants
accountable.
My oldest son is 6 years old.
I wish for security for country,
just like
we had it before, to be able to
move freely.
ALEX THOMSON: What's at stake is
huge.
If government forces, with
Russian support,
take these streets, Syria's
biggest city falls,
and the West's dream of toppling
President
Assad will be over.
But taking this vast urban
warren will need
thousands of soldiers.
More likely, Assad's forces will
simply pound
it into submission from afar, as
they did
in Homs and parts of Damascus.
But civilians in government-held
west Aleppo
are also being attacked,
seemingly indiscriminately,
by rebels from the east.
This was Hamadaniah district
today filmed
by Russian state television.
WOMAN (through translator):
Gunmen fire at
us regularly,.
We live like we are in a
tinderbox and pray
every day that the Syrian army
holds the line.
ALEX THOMSON: Although
pro-government civilians
face the terror of bullets,
mortars and shells,
in the rebel-held east, they
face the might
of the Russian and Syrian air
force, incendiary
bombs, bunker-busting munitions
and barrel
bombs, as well as shells,
mortars and bullets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The offensive
against Aleppo
has effectively ended any hope
of restoring
a cease-fire.
Taiwan was hit today by its
third typhoon
this month.
The storm swept across the
island with winds
topping 100 miles per hour,
heading for a
second landfall in Southeastern
China.
The winds and heavy rain tore
down signs,
ripped away parts of buildings,
and knocked
a tour bus sideways.
Four people died, and three
million homes
lost power.
In the U.S., Cedar Rapids, Iowa,
appears to
have escaped major flooding,
after a rain-swollen
river finally crested.
Temporary barriers kept the
water out for
the most part today.
Some neighborhoods did flood in
the state's
second largest city.
Officials said it could have
been much worse,
but the crest was well below the
devastating
levels in 2008.
There's word that more than 90
percent of
the world's population now lives
in areas
with excessive air pollution.
What's more, the World Health
Organization
reports that it's causing some
6.5 million
deaths every year, from strokes
to heart disease
to lung cancer.
WOMAN: For us, it is extremely
important to
put this data outside, for
politicians to
understand, for citizens to be
aware of this,
for countries to take action,
and for all
of us to move into promoting
some interventions
that will cause reduction of air
pollution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N. agency
says Southeast
Asia, the Eastern Mediterranean
and the Western
Pacific regions are the worst
affected.
A former al-Qaida rebel in Mali
was convicted
today of destroying historic
tombs.
The International Criminal Court
returned
a guilty verdict for Ahmad
al-Faqi al-Mahdi
in its first conviction for
attacks on cultural
sites.
Al-Mahdi admitted to demolishing
nine mausoleums
during a rebel occupation of
Timbuktu in 2012.
The Islamists were ultimately
driven out.
In economic news, the World
Trade Organization
warned that global trade is
slowing to its
weakest pace since 2009.
The group cited a growing
opposition to doing
business across borders, what it
calls creeping
protectionism.
Meantime, Wall Street recouped
some of Monday's
losses.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 133
points to close at 18228.
The Nasdaq rose 48 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly 14.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
fact-checking
the candidates and putting their
talking points
into context; Clinton and Trump
strategists
on last night's debate; bringing
music back
to Boston schools; and much
more.
Last night's much anticipated
presidential
debate saw record viewership
and, at times,
a raucous back-and-forth between
the two candidates.
But for all the spectacle, how
factual were
their claims and accusations?
Lisa Desjardins reports, putting
the debate
in context.
LISA DESJARDINS: In 94 minutes
last night,
there were at least 94 needs for
more information.
Let's start with an urgent
headline right
now, crime and race.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
You can do stop-and-frisk, which
worked very
well.
LISA DESJARDINS: A reminder,
stop-and-frisk
is a police tactic allowing
officers to pat
down pedestrians as a way to
fight crime.
Donald Trump defended it as
bring order, but:
LESTER HOLT, Moderator:
Stop-and-frisk was
ruled unconstitutional in New
York, because
it largely singled out black and
Hispanic
young men.
DONALD TRUMP: No, you're wrong.
It went before a judge who was a
very against-police
judge.
It was taken away from her.
LISA DESJARDINS: In fact, Trump
was wrong.
Stop-and-frisk was ruled
unconstitutional
by one federal judge.
But Trump also had a point, in
that no higher
courts ever ruled.
New York City leaders dropped
the case.
There was more.
DONALD TRUMP: When you have
3,000 shootings
in Chicago from January 1, when
you have 4,000
people killed in Chicago by guns
from the
beginning of the presidency of
Barack Obama,
his hometown, you have to have
stop-and-frisk.
LISA DESJARDINS: Those are
shocking numbers.
First, have there been 3,000
shootings in
Chicago this year?
Actually, there were more.
According to The Chicago
Tribune's Crime Project,
there have been more than 3,200
shooting victims
this year.
And have 4,000 Chicagoans been
shot dead during
the Obama administration?
That one may be high.
The Tribune has just over 3,100
gun deaths
from 2009 through 2015, and some
400 more
this year.
As for Clinton, she was on
defense on trade
and the massive deal known as
the Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I was against it once it was
finally negotiated
and the terms were laid out.
I wrote about that in...
DONALD TRUMP: You called it the
gold standard.
You called it the gold standard
of trade deals.
You said it's the finest deal
you have ever
seen.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: No.
DONALD TRUMP: And then you heard
what I said
about it, and all of a sudden,
you were against
it.
LISA DESJARDINS: In fact, four
years ago,
she did call the TPP the gold
standard.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: This TPP
sets the
gold standard in trade
agreements to open
free, transparent, fair trade,
the kind of
environment that has the rule of
law and a
level playing field.
LISA DESJARDINS: Now, the
Trans-Pacific deal
was still in outline form back
then.
Clinton stresses that.
But her words in 2012 were
unequivocal in
support of the idea.
After TPP was fully drafted,
Clinton pulled
that support.
Trade is a raw spot for voters
this year.
Enter another controversial
deal, NAFTA.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I think
my husband
did a pretty good job in the
1990s.
I think a lot about what worked
and how we
can make it work again...
DONALD TRUMP: Well, he approved
NAFTA...
(CROSSTALK)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: ...
million new jobs,
a balanced budget...
DONALD TRUMP: He approved NAFTA,
which is
the single worst trade deal ever
approved
in this country.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Incomes
went up for
everybody.
Manufacturing jobs went up also
in the 1990s,
if we're actually going to look
at the facts.
LISA DESJARDINS: Like the
candidates, economists
disagree over how many jobs were
created or
lost by NAFTA.
One widely cited study found it
wiped out
up to 800,000 U.S. jobs.
But a pro-trade analysis
suggested NAFTA had
a role in creating several
million jobs by
boosting trade with Canada and
Mexico.
Neither side may be happy, but
the nonpartisan
Congressional Research Service
concluded that
NAFTA caused neither huge job
losses nor gains.
In the debate, Trump gave a
specific example
of jobs he sees going to Mexico.
DONALD TRUMP: So Ford is
leaving.
You see that, their small car
division leaving.
Thousands of jobs leaving
Michigan, leaving
Ohio.
They're all leaving.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ford, itself,
called that
false.
The company said U.S. workers
will make two
new cars in the plants that used
to make small
cars, tweeting: "There is no
impact on U.S.
jobs."
One final thing to discuss:
taxes.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: So,
you've got to
ask yourself, why won't he
release his tax
returns?
Maybe he doesn't want the
American people,
all of you watching tonight, to
know that
he's paid nothing in federal
taxes, because
the only years that anybody's
ever seen were
a couple of years when he had to
turn them
over to state authorities when
he was trying
to get a casino license, and
they showed he
didn't pay any federal income
tax.
DONALD TRUMP: That makes me
smart.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton was
referring to
this story from The Washington
Post, which
found a 1981 casino filing
showing Trump paid
nothing in taxes for two years.
More context: While Trump has
railed against
others using tax loopholes, this
was his first
statement indicating he may have
paid nothing
in taxes himself.
So, that is plenty to chew on,
at least until
the next presidential debate in
just under
two weeks.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
talking to two
representatives from the
campaigns.
One of our guests is delayed.
We're going to be doing that in
just a moment.
We will be right back.
Tonight on PBS' "Frontline": an
in-depth look
at the two people who debated
last night,
Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton, and what
drives them.
The choice examines their
background, asks
what has shaped them and looks
at why each
wants to take on the presidency.
NARRATOR: Hillary decided to
fight.
She took charge of her husband's
political
comeback.
ROBERT REICH, Former U.S. Labor
Secretary:
Hillary got very involved in the
campaign.
For all intents and purposes,
she was the
campaign manager.
NARRATOR: One of her first
moves, rebrand
herself and become Mrs. Clinton.
ROBERT REICH: It was symbolic.
I'm sure she had to swallow
hard, but it was
just not worth trying to keep
her last name,
at the expense of everything
they wanted to
achieve together.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
In order to avoid any problem
and to put it
to rest, I will forever be known
as Hillary
Rodham Clinton.
WOMAN: She completely forfeited
her own identity,
at least physically, got rid of
the glasses,
got her hair dyed, started
dressing at least
modestly better, wore some
makeup, cultivated
a little bit of a drawl.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: The road
to being
somebody in this society starts
with education.
NARRATOR: The transformation was
a surprise
to some of those who had known
her the longest.
WOMAN: When she had to begin the
change her
appearance, dye her hair, lose a
lot of weight,
get rid of her glasses, not
speak up, not
be as much who she was, that
hurt all of us.
We all felt sad about that.
It was hard.
It was hard on us.
It was hard on her.
NARRATOR: She formed an alliance
with a controversial
political consultant from New
York, Dick Morris.
DICK MORRIS, Former Clinton
Presidential Adviser:
She has a wonderful instinct for
the jugular.
She felt that he had lost it
because he wasn't
tough enough, wasn't strong
enough.
And she reached out to me
because she felt
that I would be stronger and
tougher.
MAN: I think it only intensified
and began
a lot of the characteristics
that you saw
from then on, that the ends
justify the means,
that we will do what we have to
do to win,
turn to the dark arts of
politics to survive.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN, Author,
"TrumpNation": he
was seen for quite a long time
as a punchline,
the jokes about the excesses and
the failures
of the 1980s.
And he had become, you know, a
human shingle
and a punchline.
"The Apprentice" turned all that
on its head.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
New York, my city, where the
wheels of the
global economy never stop
turning.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN: He became seen
as a credible
businessperson with a real track
record, even
though that was at odds with
reality.
And the guy who became a reality
TV star via
"The Apprentice" learned that he
could become
a reality political star.
DONALD TRUMP: Who will succeed
and who will
fail, and who will be the
apprentice?
NARRATOR: For 14 seasons,
millions of Americans
watched a carefully crafted
Donald Trump.
ROGER STONE, Trump Policy
Adviser: He's perfectly
made up.
He's perfectly coiffed.
He's perfectly lit.
He's in a high-back chair making
tough decisions.
What does he look like?
He looks like a president.
OMAROSA MANIGAULT, Former
Contestant on "The
Apprentice": Donald connected
with the American
public because they wanted to be
like him.
They aspired to be just like
him.
They wanted to see all of his
affluence, and
he let them see it.
He let them into every aspect of
what it meant
to be successful in America.
DONALD TRUMP: Good morning.
WOMAN: Good morning.
DONALD TRUMP: Everybody's saying
I should
run for president.
Let me ask you a question.
Meatloaf, should I run for
president?
MICHAEL LEE "MEATLOAF" ADAY,
Singer: Absolutely.
NARRATOR: As the show took off,
Trump again
began to discuss a run for the
White House.
DONALD TRUMP: Who wouldn't vote
for him?
Who wouldn't vote for him?
All right.
Good.
WOMAN: Don't raise your hand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I am joined
now by the
producer and the director of the
film, Michael
Kirk.
Good to see you again.
MICHAEL KIRK, Filmmaker: You,
too, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you were
telling me this
is your fourth choice -- look at
the presidential
candidates over the last more
than a decade.
What was different about these
two?
MICHAEL KIRK: Well, almost
everything.
Usually, you have two
politicians.
You have got a record to
compare.
You have got a time frame to
measure up against.
What you have here is one of the
most overexposed
political figures in Hillary
Clinton, been
on the stage a long time, and
one of the most
overexposed celebrities of all
time, Donald
Trump.
And they're side by side in
chronology, but
not in any other way.
So, when the '60s happened,
she's doing one
thing.
He's not doing one thing.
He's doing something else.
So, there's room for some
comparison, but
mostly it's just so different
because they're
so disliked.
You have got the highest
negatives for both
candidates of any campaign I
remember.
And it changed the nature of the
way people
answered our questions, when we
were interviewing
their closest friends and
associates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you mean?
MICHAEL KIRK: They were just
ready to dish,
and they really came with a kind
of sober
reflection.
We do two-and-a-half-hour,
three-hour interviews,
as you know, with people.
And we did 25 for each side, and
got real
close to a lot of people, and
they all sat
there through those long
interviews and began
to pour out their anxieties,
their angst,
their ambivalences about the two
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, these are two
people we
have heard so much about, each
one of them,
by now.
We think there couldn't be
anything else out
there we haven't heard.
And yet you think you got some
new material.
MICHAEL KIRK: We went below the
white noise,
which was the first thing I
decided to do.
The second thing I decided to do
was just
tell their stories.
Don't try to get too political
about it.
Don't try to balance things out
too much.
Just go straightforwardly
through Trump, warts
and all, and through Hillary,
warts and all.
It meant in some ways that we
would end up
spending a lot of time in the
troubled dark
spaces of things that have
happened to them,
everything from Trump's divorce
from Ivanka
and the headlines and that
tawdry business
that was around that, Monica,
Gennifer Flowers.
All of that gets laid out in a
way that I
think fits because it starts
with their stories
when they were little children
and moves right
through it.
And you're left with a sense of
two people,
two warriors.
You saw them last night, real
fighters, but
she is much more closed, much
more nicked
up, much more beaten up by the
negativity
than he seems to be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you --
what surprised
you about the two of them?
MICHAEL KIRK: Well, the thing
that surprised
me the most about him was that
he's very,
very, very hungry for all of it.
And he has been since he was a
little kid.
And he has failed and he's
dropped and he's
flopped, and he's not the great
businessman
that he said he was.
He's been schooled in the
hardball of business
and life by Roy Cohn, one of the
toughest
characters in recent American
history.
But he's hungry.
He really wants it.
And he started in 1988.
We found speeches that he gave
in 1988 in
Portsmouth, New Hampshire, that
you could
play today and believe that
they're the same
speeches.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
her, Hillary
Clinton?
MICHAEL KIRK: Hillary was -- the
great mystery
of Hillary, from my point of
view, I had no
idea what a powerful force she
was in 1969
and '70 and '71.
She does the commencement speech
at Wellesley,
gets in "LIFE" magazine, is
called by some
people a voice of a generation.
She is really on the road.
She's at that thin edge of the
wedge of feminism
in 1969 and 1970 and a kind of
person who
everybody, Marian Wright Edelman
and lots
of people sort of take her under
their wing.
She goes to the Watergate
commission.
She meets Bill at Yale, to be
sure, but she
goes to the Watergate committee,
and works
there.
And everybody thinks she's on
her way.
And suddenly she announces, I'm
going to Arkansas
to live with this bounder, Bill
Clinton, and
we're going to get involved in
politics.
And everybody, everybody that we
talked to
said, how can this be?
I think Robert Reich was
heartbroken.
I think he just -- literally, on
camera, you
see him sort of melt down
reliving what that
decision meant for her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you're
setting up two
stories that we really, really
want to hear.
We will be watching.
MICHAEL KIRK: That's great.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Kirk with
"Frontline,"
we thank you.
And a reminder: "Frontline: The
Choice 2016"
premieres tonight on most PBS
stations.
And a reminder: "Frontline: The
Choice 2016"
premieres tonight on most PBS
stations.
And now to get some post-debate
reaction from
both the campaigns, we hear from
two top political
strategists, starting with the
Republican
National Committee's Sean
Spicer.
Sean, welcome back to the
"NewsHour."
So, what's your assessment of
last night?
How did Mr. Trump do?
SEAN SPICER, Republican National
Committee
Communications Director: Thanks,
Judy.
I think he really was able to
make that contrast
with Hillary Clinton.
Last night, Donald Trump had an
opportunity
to present -- to become that
candidate of
change and present himself as
that, whereas
Hillary Clinton was the campaign
-- the candidate
of the establishment and the
status quo.
If you were looking for a
candidate that's
going to bring change to
Washington, I think
Donald Trump showed you last
night that he's
your candidate.
If you're ready for more of the
same, I think
Hillary Clinton made the case
that she's been
in Washington for 30 years, and
she can continue
to deliver more of the same.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the things
he tweeted
last night was -- and I'm
quoting -- "Nothing
on e-mails, nothing on the
corrupt Clinton
Foundation, and nothing on
Benghazi."
Some of his supporters are
saying today that
he should have brought these
things up, and
he missed these opportunities.
SEAN SPICER: Well, you're always
going to
go back after a debate and
figure where you
could have probably gotten some
points, additional
points in or where you probably
could have
defended your record better.
I think there is no situation in
which you
wouldn't do that.
But I think for the -- when you
look at the
overall tone and tenor of the
debate, it was
one after another against Donald
Trump.
There was no follow-up on
Hillary Clinton
and nothing about her record
with respect
to the Clinton Foundation,
nothing about Benghazi,
nothing about immigration,
nothing against
all the issues that were against
them.
You know, for all the whining
they did the
day before about the media's
role in this,
I think they definitely got
their way.
All of the questions seemed
focused on Donald
Trump.
All of the follow-ups and the
interruptions
were against Donald Trump.
She basically got a pass last
night, but it
is what it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you're saying
the moderating
was unfair?
SEAN SPICER: No, I mean, I don't
-- it's not
a question of fair or unfair.
Those are the facts.
Those are what they are.
She was never interrupted once
and she was
never asked about key scandals
and issues
concerning her record.
Those aren't -- I'm not here to
complain.
I'm just here to make sure that
everyone understands
what happened last night.
Donald Trump had a full vetting
of his record,
and she was basically given a
pass on the
issues of substance that matter
to voters
where there's been a lot of
concern on her
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about
something she brought up, and
that was -- or
that he was asked about by
Lester Holt, and
that was his income taxes.
Hillary Clinton said the few
years that his
forms have been made public, he
didn't pay
federal income tax.
And his answer was, "That makes
me smart."
Do you think that's a good
message to send
to the American people?
SEAN SPICER: Well, first, I
think most Americans
are sitting back there saying, I
want his
accountant.
You know, no one sits back to
try to figure
it out, how to pay more taxes.
We all pay a ton of taxes,
whether it's sales
taxes, utility taxes.
But the fact of the matter is,
she was there
trying to get at him.
What she wanted to do was to
avoid and pivot
away from talking about the fact
that Donald
Trump's taxes, no matter what he
pay, didn't
hurt anybody, didn't compromise
national security.
The secret server that she had
and the ability
that -- or the classified
information that
she took off of her secret
server and e-mailed
around potentially could have
threatened national
security.
Other countries could have
gotten it.
And she was doing everything she
could to
pivot away from having to talk
about her own
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about
something else.
Going into this et, the Trump
campaign was
saying that they -- among other
things, they
clearly wanted to add in, bring
in new voters,
minorities, women.
And then you had this series of
comments about
what Donald Trump has said in
the past about
the former Miss Universe.
Hillary Clinton raised it last
night.
She said Donald Trump had called
Alicia Machado
Miss Piggy.
Today, Donald Trump spoke about
that and said
that Ms. Machado had -- quote --
"gained a
massive amount of weight, and
that was a problem."
Is this something you think he
should be expanding
on, talking about?
SEAN SPICER: Well, look, I mean,
he didn't
bring this up.
She did.
Lester Holt did.
They went into this.
Donald Trump, as you said, went
in talking
about how to make America great
again, how
to bring jobs, how to change the
regulatory
system to allow people to have
better lives
and make more money, how to
provide better
for their family, how to lift
all people up
in America.
I mean, that's what he was doing
last night.
He was talking about policies
and solutions
to make the country better.
She was digging up 20-year-old
comments and
quotes out of context and
saying, this is
what's happening.
So, I mean, let's be honest
about who was
doing what.
It was Hillary Clinton who
should have been
there talking about her record
as secretary
of state and two terms in the
Senate and 30
years in Washington.
Instead of doing that, she was
digging up
quotes.
You have got to wonder, if you
have that kind
of a resume and that few of
accomplishments,
that really tells you where you
are in this
race.
Donald Trump was the candidate
that was there
talking about solutions and
policies last
night, not Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, he
said going
into this debate, really, in a
way, took pride
in the fact that he didn't
prepare a great
deal.
Do you think that's the right
approach for
the next debate?
SEAN SPICER: Well, first of all,
he didn't
say that.
He didn't prepare, in the sense
that -- in
the traditional sense of
standing at podiums
going back and forth, but he was
clearly preparing.
He spent a lot of time with
senior advisers
and economic advisers going over
key policies
and honing in stuff.
He was largely successful at
that.
You look at the online polls
that came out,
the CNBC poll, the "TIME" poll
-- 1.4 million
people weighed in on the "TIME"
poll.
He was the clear winner.
The CNBC poll, almost a million
people all
favoring him.
We took in $14 million in the
past 24 hours,
mostly in low dollars.
What that tells you is that his
message of
change is resonating.
And that is what mostly matters
is, are people
hearing what he's saying and
want to be part
of this team and cast their vote
for him in
November?
And I think the evidence was
pretty clear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that online polls
are not necessarily scientific.
People can answer them multiple
times.
But we hear what you're saying,
and we certainly
hear you say that you have
raised some money.
Sean Spicer with the RNC, we
thank you.
SEAN SPICER: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to the Democrats.
Joining me is President Obama's
2008 campaign
manager and now Hillary Clinton
supporter
David Plouffe.
David, welcome back to the
program.
What's your assessment of last
night?
DAVID PLOUFFE, Former Senior
White House Adviser:
Well, I think the first debate
was probably
the most important moment for
the rest of
the campaign.
And I think Hillary Clinton
seized that moment.
Donald Trump -- I think Donald
Trump had a
good first 10 or 15 minutes, and
then he kind
of lost his way and became
unhinged.
So, I believe Hillary Clinton's
got an edge
in the race, so, given that, the
fact that
Donald Trump squandered the
moment.
And it wasn't just that he
performed badly.
Hey, we had a bad debate in
2012, the first
one.
So, I have been through both
good and bad.
But we were in the lead, and
Barack Obama
just had a bad performance.
He didn't have a lot of bad
moments.
Donald Trump saying he was smart
not to pay
taxes, really bragging about the
fact that
he exploited loopholes not to
pay his contractors,
taking advantage of the housing
crisis, and
then I think this Alicia Machado
incident
that he doubled down on today is
going to
live on in the campaign.
So, it's not just that he had a
bad night
last night.
I think he's going to have bad
few days here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, at the same
time, he
did continue the argument that
he's the change
the country needs and that
politicians like
Hillary Clinton, who he said
have been in
office 30, 35 years, have messed
things up
and the country needs somebody
new.
Did she have a good answer for
that, do you
think?
DAVID PLOUFFE: I think she did.
And I'm sure that will come up
again in Saint
Louis.
And I will leave it to Hillary
Clinton to
show how she's going to advance
that ball.
But I think part of it is, OK,
Donald Trump
is change, but he's dangerous
change.
I mean, listen, I worked in the
White House,
Judy.
I obviously support Hillary
Clinton, but I
can't fathom someone of that
temperament and
that decision-making and what we
saw last
night.
I mean, we have never seen a
major party nominee
be so substance-less, be
confused.
You know, I mean, Mitt Romney,
John McCain,
John Kerry, Al Gore, these were
serious people.
And so, again, I think that's
going to be
a difference in this race.
I think he has a ceiling.
I have always thought his
ceiling on his vote
was quite a bit lower than
Hillary Clinton's.
I think she's got more vote to
gain of what's
left out there.
And I really don't -- I don't
think he lost
any votes last night.
And I'm sure Trump partisans
loved what he
had to say.
But I don't think he added.
And I think he's in a position
in this race
where he needs to add quite a
bit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Hillary
Clinton is getting
some good reviews.
But even some Democratic
commentators are
saying she didn't have the best
answer on
some of the issues that resonate
most with
voters, like jobs that are
leaving this country
to go elsewhere because of
trade, like the
TPP, the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, like NAFTA.
What else could she have said,
do you think,
to improve her answer on that?
DAVID PLOUFFE: Well, what she
spoke was the
truth.
So, she said there are some
trade deals she
supports, and here's the
criteria.
So, there's no doubt that Trump
has used trade
to gain some support.
I think he's probably gotten all
he's going
to get from that issue.
But I'm sure we will talk about
this in Saint
Louis with him.
And so I think she's got to say,
A, here's
my view on trade, and, B, what I
think she
did do a good job of is saying
Trump's ideas
on taxes, on the economy would
actually cost
us millions of jobs and blow up
the deficit.
I mean, he's not offering
anything new.
But it's worse than what Romney
was offering.
It's worse than what McCain was
offering.
And we had great success on both
of those
things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also hear,
David Plouffe,
you also hear Democrats saying
that they wish
she had a crisp answer on why
she should be
elected president, that she
often tends to
say when asked about one issue
or another,
she gives a number of items in a
list, and
she will say, this is my plan or
this is my
platform.
Do you think that's a challenge
for her?
DAVID PLOUFFE: Well, I spoke
about this before
the debate.
I think what I would like to see
more of,
for sure, is no one doubts her
head.
People might not agree with
everything she's
got, but she's got a great grasp
of politics
-- to, really, from the heart
and from the
gut, talk about why she's
running, why this
race, why her at this moment,
and on whose
behalf.
And the town hall debate is a
great place,
obviously, because you're having
a conversation
with your fellow citizens to do
that.
So, yes, I think the moments
where she has
talked about those types of
things, that she
doesn't want anybody to have to
struggles
that her mom did.
Now, I think she talked very
passionately
about her father and the lessons
she learned
there last night.
That was effective.
The more we see of that, I think
the better
off these next five-and-a-half
weeks will
be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You started out,
David Plouffe,
by saying you thought this first
debate would
be the most watched.
Are you saying we really aren't
going to have
any more sort of pivotal moments
in this campaign
for the next six weeks?
DAVID PLOUFFE: Well, so, here's
what I would
say.
There are two more pivotal
moments we know
about, the two presidential --
the V.P. debate
is important, but it's rarely
been something
that really moves the ball.
But it's important, and I'm sure
Tim Kaine
will do a good job, and Pence
will try and
do a good job for Trump.
The two presidential campaigns,
the campaign
itself, meaning, you know, where
the candidates
are going, are they turning out
the right
kind of vote, are they
persuading voters,
what kind of ground operation,
and then obviously
the unforeseen event.
But I think, unlike '12, when we
lost the
first debate, we were in the
lead.
So, that's a difference, because
I think Clinton
is in the lead.
And, again, secondly, I don't
think Obama
-- it was just a bad
performance.
We prepared him poorly.
He didn't perform well.
Romney performed well.
But there was no one moment.
It was just a bad, flat
performance.
So, I think that Trump lost a
big opportunity
last night.
The TV ratings were over 80
million.
My suspicion is, if you
aggregate everyone
who watched it together with
people in homes,
at bars, on their phones, it's
goings to be
close to 100.
So, I don't know.
Maybe the next one.
Trump may be must-see TV, and
the next two
will be important, but he has
got to really,
really dominate the next two
debates in a
way that swing voters say, OK,
Trump is now
the one I'm leaning towards.
And I just -- I don't think he's
got that
in him, by the way.
I don't see a president when I
look at Donald
Trump.
But we will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Plouffe, we
thank you.
DAVID PLOUFFE: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
personal view
on the struggles of white
working-class Americans.
But first: At a time when public
schools across
the country are cutting the arts
out of education,
a jazz musician in Boston is
finding a way
to push through the noise.
Lisa Stark of our partners at
Education Week
has this report.
It's for our weekly education
series, Making
the Grade.
LISA STARK: Myran Parker-Brass
began singing
at age 5.
She's never stopped.
A classically trained
mezzo-soprano, she's
now raising her voice to push
arts education
in Boston's public schools.
MYRAN PARKER-BRASS, Arts
Activist: Finding
the opportunity to teach, as
well as to perform,
has always been what keeps me
sane, I think.
LISA STARK: Parker-Brass is the
district's
arts director, a job she jumped
into five
years ago after two decades with
the Boston
Symphony.
A one-time public schoolteacher
herself, she
had an ambitious plan.
MYRAN PARKER-BRASS: Our goal is
that we will
have 100 percent of our students
in K-8 receiving
at least weekly arts education.
LISA STARK: They're almost
there.
In 2009, less than 70 percent of
elementary
and middle school students had a
regular arts
class.
Today, over 90 percent do.
CHILDREN: She was right behind
us, wasn't
she?
LISA STARK: Taking theater,
dance, music and
visual art at least once a week.
And the percentage of high
school students
taking art classes has nearly
tripled.
ALLYSSA JONES, Boston Public
Schools: It's
been a huge, huge change.
LISA STARK: Allyssa Jones, who
oversees the
district's performing arts
program, was a
music teacher when Parker-Brass
came on board
and began ramping up the arts
programs.
ALLYSSA JONES: What a parade,
man, what a
parade.
What a battle to win.
Changing minds is pretty
awesome.
LISA STARK: Changing minds about
the value
of arts education.
MYRAN PARKER-BRASS: Learning and
working in
the arts provide students the
opportunity
to be creative, to be
innovative, to be reflective,
to learn how to work as a team.
LISA STARK: And it's not just
students who
are harmonizing.
Parker-Brass built a team to
support her arts
teachers, and she fine-tuned
outside partnerships
already in place.
These high school students, for
example, explore
art with the help of the
Massachusetts College
of Art and Design, but the
lynchpin of the
turnaround, increased funding.
Under Parker-Brass, Boston
increased its arts
spending by more than 50
percent, from $17
million to $26 million, and
added millions
more in outside grant funding,
allowing the
district to double the number of
full-time
art teachers.
The result?
An additional 14,000 students in
Boston now
receive instruction during the
school week.
Parker-Brass isn't ready to take
a bow.
She's too busy with her next
push, trying
to convince Massachusetts state
universities
to change their admission
requirements to
include not just academics, but
a high school
arts class.
MYRAN PARKER-BRASS: I think our
job is to
make sure that our students see
art, understand
art, appreciate it, and, it is
-- and if they
are passionate enough, create
it.
LISA STARK: I'm Lisa Stark of
Education Week,
reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, in this
topsy-turvy election
year, we have a timely portrait
of Americans
who are often ignored and
misunderstood, depicted
as only an insider could.
It's the first in an occasional
series on
books this election season we're
calling Political
Ink.
J.D. Vance, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
This book is many things,
"Hillbilly Elegy,"
but I think, amongst all else,
it's a personal
story.
It's about growing up in
Appalachia under
what I think what everybody
would agree difficult
circumstances, raised by your
grandparents,
father who wasn't there, mother
had an addiction.
I think, for most people, hard
to write about
these things, but not hard for
you?
J.D. VANCE, Author, "Hillbilly
Elegy: A Memoir
of a Family and Culture in
Crisis": No, it
was definitely hard.
I definitely struggled allotted
with the intrusion
and just being so open about my
personal history
and my family history.
But I decided that, ultimately,
it was worth
it because I felt that a lot of
these issues
needed to be talked about.
They needed to be talked about
openly.
And I couldn't think of a better
way to do
it than just be really honest
about my own
failings and my family's
failings, because
sometimes honesty is just the
best policy,
and that starts with me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you do
write very candidly
about a rough-around-the-edges
lifestyle,
both in Kentucky and then when
your family
moved to Southern Ohio.
It's rough around the edges, but
it's a life
you love and a life you honor.
J.D. VANCE: Yes, absolutely.
There are good and bad parts of
this community
and of my own family, of course.
And I try to be very frank about
the problems,
but also very compassionate, and
also explain
why so many of these people were
so good to
me and so important in my life,
and, frankly,
why I wouldn't have had the
opportunities
I have right now if it weren't
for them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
as you grow
older, as you finish school, you
joined the
Marines and your life changed,
you began to
be more critical of some of
these people,
of their lifestyle, not of the
individuals,
but of what you were seeing.
And what did you find?
What did you grow to see that
you didn't see
when you were younger?
J.D. VANCE: Well, I started to
see that a
lot of the reason that we don't
have the level
of upward mobility, why there
aren't more
kids like me at places like Yale
Law School
-- that's really the question I
was trying
to answer in writing the book.
And it occurred to me that there
are things
happening in our community, from
the addiction
crisis, to family breakdown, to
also the economic
problems that exist in the
community.
And all of these sort of
conspired against
a lot of our youth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you make it
clear the blame
can be spread all around.
You point out the social
programs that haven't
helped.
You talk about the individuals
themselves...
J.D. VANCE: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... who are part
of the issue.
J.D. VANCE: Yes, absolutely.
The thing I try to really hammer
home in the
book is that this is a sort of
all-of-the-above
type of problem.
It's not just that government
has failed us.
It's not just that we have
failed ourselves.
It's government.
It's individuals.
It's sort of everything in
between, from families
and communities and
neighborhoods, churches
and so forth.
And it's the sort of problem
that I think
can't be solved super easily.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and, as you
say, you
make it clear that the rest of
us, the rest
of the country, is partly to
blame for what's
happened to white working-class
Americans.
You don't see a solution, but
what should
we be doing differently?
J.D. VANCE: Yes, I think that we
should be
understanding these communities
and taking
these communities as they
actually are.
So, we might ask, for example,
how do we make
it a little bit easier for
low-income parents
to interact better with their
children, to
interact better with their
partners?
That's just one idea.
But, hopefully, folks who pick
up the book
will take away from it a sense
that this social
crisis in white working-class
communities
is pretty complicated, but it's
not totally
immune to public policy
solutions.
There are things that we might
do as a broader
society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You spell out so
much of the
gap between educated America,
well-to-do,
well-off, middle-income America,
and the life
that you grew up in.
Why is that gap getting bigger?
J.D. VANCE: Well, I think part
of it is that
we don't spend a whole lot of
time around
each other.
So, it was really striking to me
the sense
of culture alienation I had when
I started
law school.
It was clear to me that I had
never really
spent that much time around
these people,
and these people had never
really spent that
much time in a neighborhood that
I grew up
around.
So, when you're so disconnected
geographically,
even if you live in the same
maybe region
of the country, it's hard to
really understand
how the other thinks, what the
attitudes of
other groups of people are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think it's
pretty clear in
this year a lot of people have
looked to you
to explain frankly much of the
Donald Trump
vote.
J.D. VANCE: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: White
working-class Americans,
is that really who you're
talking about here?
And how do you explain the
attraction of Donald
Trump?
J.D. VANCE: I think it's a very
complicated
phenomenon.
It's difficult to understand why
so many of
these folks have been attracted
to Donald
Trump.
But a big part of it is the way
that he conducts
himself.
He's relatable in a way that you
might talk
about politics around the dinner
table.
That's something that people see
in Donald
Trump that maybe they see a
little bit in
themselves.
But there's also a sense that
people just
feel ignored by the political
class.
They feel like their communities
have really
been struggling in a lot of
different ways
for 20 or 30 years, and nobody
has really
cared.
And Trump is the first person to
at least
see these communities, even if
you think,
as I do, that he doesn't have
all the solutions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You said many of
the Americans
you know so well don't trust --
not only do
they not trust politicians.
They don't trust the news media.
You quote somebody you know as
saying the
free press, to them, is full of
-- I'm not
going to say the word.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you do
describe a gap here,
people with information, with
education, and
those with less information and
less education.
How do you see that?
J.D. VANCE: Well, I think that
the sense of
cultural alienation breeds a
sense of mistrust
of everything that is perceived
to be of the
elite.
So, you ultimately don't trust
the people
who seem to have information,
power, and control
over the news.
But I also think, frankly, the
conservative
media -- and I say this as a
right-wing person
-- we have got to do a better
job of engaging
with voters.
I write that some of the ways
that we talk
about the news media, the way
that conservative
media talks about the president,
it foments
this sense of alienation.
And what a lot of the folks in
the white working
class really need right now is
something that
encourages them to reintegrate
with their
communities, not to further
self-segregate.
So, like everything, it's the
sort of situation
where all of us have a role to
play.
And I certainly put my side in
part of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have been
paying attention
to something Hillary Clinton
said in describing
Donald Trump's followers.
She called them a basket of
deplorables.
Is there something to what she
said, or is
she completely off-base?
J.D. VANCE: Well, I think it's
probably both.
There are definitely -- there is
definitely
an element of Donald Trump's
support that
has its basis in racism or
xenophobia.
But a lot of these folks are
just really hardworking
people who are struggling in
really important
ways.
And the way that I think about
is that folks
can be led by political leaders
in one direction
or another.
They can be pushed or pulled.
And when Hillary Clinton says
something like
that, it strikes me that she's
pushing people
away from what she wants them to
get out of
her message.
And if you think, as I do, that
Donald Trump
doesn't necessarily have a good
message either,
that's maybe not the best
approach to politics.
It's not how you win these folks
over.
And if you're worried about them
being racist
now, when you push them away and
push them
to somebody like Trump, you're
only going
to make the problem worse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is the
way to win
them over?
J.D. VANCE: Well, I think the
first step,
as Trump has sort of shed some
light on, is
just to recognize the nature of
the problem,
to recognize that these
communities are really
struggling.
And my hope is that, after 2016,
after we
have all survived this election
season, that
people are thinking a little bit
more constructively
about how to help.
They're not just diagnosing the
problem and
then saying, well, let's build a
Mexican border
wall to fix everything.
Maybe they're diagnosing the
problem and thinking
a little bit more constructively
about the
best way forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: J.D. Vance, the
book is "Hillbilly
Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and
Culture in
Crisis."
It is a great read.
Thank you very much.
J.D. VANCE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Time for a
"NewsHour" Essay.
Last month, a column by Tracy
Grant, The Washington
Post newspaper's deputy managing
editor, really
moved members of our staff.
We asked her to expand on her
idea with us.
TRACY GRANT, The Washington
Post: Ten years
ago, my world as I knew it
ended.
My husband of 19 years, the
father of my two
sons, was diagnosed with
terminal cancer.
Over the course of seven months,
Bill went
from beating me silly on the
tennis court
to needing my help to go to the
bathroom and
bathe.
It was the best seven months of
my life.
I realize how that sounds, but I
was 42 when
my husband was diagnosed.
I had a great job, two terrific
kids, but
I had yet to discover the reason
I was put
on this Earth.
During those seven months, I
came to understand
that, whatever else I did in my
life, nothing
would matter more than this.
In the early days after Bill's
diagnosis,
being a caregiver caused me to
be the best
reporter I knew how to be.
There was a heavy sense that I
could out-MacGyver
the disease.
I was relentless in making
doctors and insurance
companies answer my questions.
But I had been a good reporter
before.
Here's what changed: There were
no bad days.
The petty day-in/day-out
grievances of an
irksome co-worker or a flat
tired paled in
comparison to the joy of
spontaneous laughter
or the night sky.
I found I could train myself to
see more beauty
than bother, to set my internal
barometer
to be more compassionate than
callous.
During Bill's last weekend, we
sat side by
side on his hospital bed,
sharing a sandwich
and watching television.
It was our last moment as us.
And I thought to myself, I could
live with
this man, even as compromised as
he is, for
the next 40 years, not because I
was a saint,
but because I had learned to
focus on the
essence of Bill and our
relationship.
What seven months earlier would
have seemed
to be unspeakably less was just
right.
I now realize that I may never
be as good
a person as I was when I cared
for Bill, but
the best version of myself
didn't die with
him.
I have fought hard not to lose
the perspective
his illness gave me.
One of the worst things that can
happen to
anyone has already happened to
me.
So, what else is there to be
afraid of?
It has been liberating in a way
that has made
me a better mother, a better
friend, a better
colleague.
I'm quicker to say I'm sorry,
and I don't
need to be right all the time.
I am a better person for having
been Bill's
caregiver.
It was his last, best gift to
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares.
Last night, the Miami Marlins
baseball team
paid tribute to 24-year-old Jose
Fernandez,
the talented young pitcher who
died in a boating
accident this weekend.
William Brangham has more.
ANNOUNCER: Our community, the
baseball world
and the Miami Marlins suffered a
tragic loss
yesterday with the passing of
Jose Fernandez.
Our hearts are heavy with sorry
as we gather
today, together tonight, as a
family to remember
a man and a teammate who meant
so much to
all of us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jose Fernandez
had been
scheduled to start in last
night's game against
the New York Mets, but, instead,
the stadium
took a moment of silence and
then a poignant
rendition of "Take Me Out to the
Ball Game."
Fernandez, who had defected from
Cuba when
he was just 15, was wildly
popular in Miami
and a former National League
Rookie of the
Year.
As the pregame ceremony closed,
the Marlins,
each wearing a jersey with
Fernandez's name,
gathered to inscribe the
two-time All-Star's
name on the pitcher's mound
bearing his number.
And emotions ran high even as
the game got
under way.
Teammate and leadoff hitter Dee
Gordon wore
Fernandez's helmet, stepped to
the plate,
and hit the ball out of the
park.
It was his first homer of the
season.
Gordon said he had never hit a
ball that far
before, even in batting
practice.
The Marlins went on to win 7-3.
And, in victory, they again
honored Fernandez,
each kneeling to place their
caps and the
game ball on the mound where
their former
ace had once stood.
The Marlins plan to retire
Fernandez's number,
16, the first number ever
retired in the club's
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the perfect
way to remember
Jose Fernandez.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.